# Investigating different phonological inventories in PHOIBLE

Copyright 2020, Steven Moran <steven.moran@uzh.ch>

## Overview

This is an initial investigation into how much different descriptions of the same "language's" phonological inventory differ.

Here's a great quote from Demolin 1995:

"Several researchers have paid attention to the rather complex set of
implosives and glottalized consonants in this language, most of them
giving a personal interpretation of the system. Description made by
Lendu speakers - Ngakpa-Ndjali (1977), Dhejju (1977), Dirive (1981)
and Dz’ve (1982) - present a distinction between voiced and voiceless
implosives (or preglottalized consonants) in their inventory.
Trifkovic (1977) gives an inventory of five implosives [ɓ, ɗ,
ɓ-with-tail, t-with-top-hook, ʄ]. Mertens (1978) gives four voiced
implosives [ ɓ, ɗ, ʄ, g͡ɓ ]and four voiceless implosives, [ x, y, z, a
]. Dimmendaal (1986) posits two implosives [bx, dx], a set of three
preglottalized consonants [?bx, ?dx, ?jx] and two preglottalized
glides [?jx, ?wx]/ Goyvaerts (1988) presents data showing contrasts
between voiced egressive, voiced implosive, and preflottalized
consonants at three articulatory positions: labial, alveolar and
velar. He suggest three possible solutions to account for the set of
preglottalized stops: they are either preglottalized, or ejectives, or
voiceless implosives. Finally, Kutsch Lojenga (1991) present an
inventory of eight consonants pronounced with a glottalic airstream
mechanismL five voiced implosives, [ɓ, ɗ, ʄ, ʔ, ʔ͡w] [(ʔ, ʔ͡w] being
historical developments of *ʔ͡ɡ and *ɡ͡ɓ), and three voiceless
implosives, [bx, tx, cx]. Furthermore, Goyvaerts (1988) and Dhejju
(1977) present velar consonants which are not taken into account in
the other inventories. This situation being rather confusing, one aim
of this paper is to present a detailed phonetic description of the
implosive consonants found in Lendu. Diachronic aspects concerning the
inventory of implosives in Central Sudanic languages and their
possible influence on tonogenesis are also examined."

## References

@misc{demolin1995phonetics,
  title={The phonetics and phonology of glottalized consonants in Lendu. Phonology and Phonetic Evidence. Papers in Laboratory Phonology IV, ed. by Bruce Connell and Amalia Arvanti, 368-385},
  author={Demolin, Didier},
  year={1995},
  publisher={Cambridge: Cambridge University Press}
}